Add post: Running Python Turtle in the Browser with Pyodide (#63)
pyodide/pyodide-blog: content/posts/python-turtle-in-the-browser-with-pyodide.md

---
title: "Running Python Turtle in the Browser with Pyodide"
date: 2026-01-01
author: "Aaqid Masoodi"
showToc: true
TocOpen: false
hidemeta: false
comments: false
---
# Running Python Turtle in the Browser

Python's turtle module is often the first visual programming experience for learners. It's immediate, intuitive and deeply satisfying. You write code, a little arrow draws on screen.

But running turtle in the browser has always been compromised.

> Existing browser-based Python environments implement *subsets* of the turtle API. They work for simple demos: draw a square, make a spiral. But try anything interactive like keyboard-controlled games, mouse-driven drawing, real-time animations and the experience falls apart.

Reviewer: Could you please provide some more explanation about "why" it is compromised (e.g. missing tkinter support in browser, etc). and what kind of other browser-based Python environment (e.g. basthon, which also have its own turtle implementation) has subset of turtle support?

Before diving into architecture, let's establish what "works" means in practice. These are real programs running in the browser, unchanged from their desktop versions.

### Interactive Games

**Pong**: Two-player game with keyboard controls (`W/S` and `Arrow keys`), ball physics, paddle collision detection, and live scoring.

[View Project](https://www.codescapes.io/community/scape/f10bced9-f2e3-4c50-ab9c-38023c70cb5d)
<br>
![GIF: Pong Game Build with Turtle Graphics Running in the Browser](https://i.imgur.com/KqG1EZP.gif)

**Brick Breaker**: Paddle-controlled ball bouncing through destructible bricks. Requires [onkeypress()], collision detection, and [tracer(0)/update()] for smooth animation.

[View Project](https://www.codescapes.io/community/scape/3182ac71-8787-4530-80f7-4c61ba4ce0c8)
<br>
![GIF: Brick Breaker showing brick destruction and score updates](https://i.imgur.com/1kpaGdB.gif)

Both games use the standard game loop pattern:

1. Disable automatic screen updates with tracer(0)
2. Process input events
3. Update game state
4. Redraw everything
5. Call update() to display the frame
6. Sleep briefly to control framerate
7. Repeat forever via `while True`

> This pattern requires blocking operations, event handling and flicker-free rendering, all of which fail in typical browser implementations.

Reviewer: What is "typical browser implementations"?

---

### Generative Art and Visualization

**Animated Spirograph**: A spiral that rotates continuously in real-time.

[View Project](https://www.codescapes.io/community/scape/71622718-fe46-4c80-a27c-d172585ce6c0)
<br>
![GIF: Rotating spiral animation at 60 FPS](https://i.imgur.com/NpxBMbA.gif)

Gif is only shows 15 fps, view original project at https://www.codescapes.io/view/71622718-fe46-4c80-a27c-d172585ce6c0

**Pattern Playlist**: Distinct geometric patterns (spirographs, mandalas, kaleidoscopes) cycling automatically with one-second intervals.

[View Project](https://www.codescapes.io/community/scape/3c269c6c-ab15-4f5a-966b-3f00b5c868e0)
<br>
![GIF: Multiple patterns transitioning](https://i.imgur.com/G6Y5npu.gif)

> These demonstrate sustained animation loops with `time.sleep()` for pacing. This is another operation that typically breaks in browser Python.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These demonstrate sustained animation loops with `time.sleep()` for pacing. This is another operation that typically breaks in Pyodide.
```

The "browser Python" sounds a bit ambiguous, as there can be different implementations. I think it would be better to clearly mention that it is an issue in Pyodide (here and in other places as well).

---

### Interactive 3D Graphics

**3D Spiral with Mouse Control**: A golden spiral rendered in 3D space. Click and drag to rotate the view around the Y-axis.

[View Project](https://www.codescapes.io/community/scape/b2b0676d-4ec5-46b4-9cab-6da707740b90)
<br>
![GIF: 3D spiral responding to mouse drag input](https://i.imgur.com/ebR3uww.gif)

This example combines:
- onscreenclick() for press detection
- onrelease() for release detection  
- ondrag() for continuous position updates
- Real-time 3D projection mathematics
- 30 FPS render loop with timing control

The full mouse event API working correctly is rare in browser implementations.

---

### Multi-File Applications

**Live Weather Dashboard**: A three-file application that prompts for a city name, fetches weather data from an API and displays results using turtle graphics as the UI layer.

[View Project](https://www.codescapes.io/community/scape/8fab103d-8278-4b83-9005-ab22bba95b9c)
<br>
![GIF: Weather app workflow: input city, fetch data, display results](https://i.imgur.com/N97Djyp.gif)

This demonstrates:
- Python's input() function working correctly

> - HTTP requests via the `requests` library (patched through pyodide-http)

Reviewer: Note that `requests` work without `pyodide-http` now in recent Pyodide versions. They now have Pyodide adaptor internally.

### Python's Assumptions

The CPython turtle module was built for Tkinter, a desktop GUI toolkit. It assumes:

1. **Single-threaded blocking execution**: The Python interpreter runs on the main thread. [mainloop()] blocks that thread forever, yielding control to Tk's event loop.

2. **Synchronous input**: [input()] halts program execution until the user presses Enter. The thread simply waits.

3. **Direct canvas access**: Drawing commands immediately modify the Tk canvas. There's no message passing or thread coordination.

4. **Cooperative timing**: `time.sleep()` blocks the thread for a duration. Other threads (if any) continue, but Python code pauses.

### The Browser's Reality

Browsers enforce a fundamentally different model:

1. **Non-blocking main thread**: The main thread runs the JavaScript event loop. Blocking it freezes the entire page—no rendering, no input, no network responses. Browsers actively prevent this.

2. **No synchronous input API**: There's no browser primitive that blocks JavaScript until user input arrives. `prompt()` exists but can't be accessed from Web Workers.

> 3. **Isolated rendering context**: WebAssembly code (where Pyodide runs) cannot directly access the DOM or Canvas. Communication requires message passing.

Reviewer: Well, it is not that WASM code cannot access DOM, it is the worker that cannot access the dom.

4. **Sleep blocks everything**: In a Worker, `time.sleep()` blocks the entire Worker thread. That's acceptable, but during that time no messages can be processed.

### The Transpilation Approach and Its Limits

> Projects like Skulpt and Brython take the transpilation approach converting Python source code to JavaScript. This avoids the threading problem entirely by running Python "natively" in JS.

Reviewer: Brython is a transpiler, but skulpt is a Python interpreter implemented in JS. They use different approach.

**TurtleCanvas.tsx (Main Thread)**

A React component that:

1. Receives command messages from the Worker
2. Maintains rendering state (active turtles, ink history, stamps)
3. Draws to hidden back buffers
4. Swaps buffers to the display canvas on `UPDATE` commands
5. Captures user input events
6. Queues events for Python to poll

**Service Worker**

A browser Service Worker provides the event queue infrastructure:

1. Intercepts special fetch URLs (`/_turtle_events`, `/_turtle_push_event`)
2. Maintains an in-memory event queue
3. Returns queued events when polled, then clears the queue
4. Holds long-poll connections for blocking input() support

---

## The Command Protocol

Communication between Python and the renderer uses a JSON message protocol. Understanding this protocol illuminates how the system maintains correctness.

### Message Structure

Every message follows the envelope format:

```
{
  type: "TURTLE_CMD",
  payload: {
    cmd: "COMMAND_NAME",
    id: <turtle_id>,
    ...command-specific fields
  }
}
```

> The [id](file:///Users/aaqidmasoodi/Documents/codescapes/src/runners/python/turtle_shim.py#1150-1153) field identifies which turtle the command affects. This enables multiple independent turtles.

Reviewer: It is a local URL 😅

### Command Categories

**Initialization Commands**

| Command | Purpose |
|---------|---------|
| `INIT` | Reset canvas, set dimensions, clear all state |
| `SETUP` | Resize canvas dimensions |
| `CREATE` | Instantiate a new turtle with initial properties |

**Motion Commands**

| Command | Fields | Notes |
|---------|--------|-------|
| `MOVE` | `x, y, pen_down, color, width` | Draws line if pen is down |

> | `ROTATE` | [heading](file:///Users/aaqidmasoodi/Documents/codescapes/src/runners/python/turtle_shim.py#1167-1169) | Updates turtle orientation |

Reviewer: Here too.

| `CIRCLE` | `radius, extent, steps, color, filling, fillcolor` | Arc or full circle |

**State Commands**

| Command | Purpose |
|---------|---------|
| `PEN_UPDATE` | Change pen color, fill color, or width |
| `UPDATE_TURTLE` | Change shape, stretch factors, speed |
| `SHOW` / `HIDE` | Toggle turtle visibility |
| `BEGIN_FILL` / `END_FILL` | Polygon fill boundary markers |

**Rendering Control**

| Command | Purpose |
|---------|---------|
| `UPDATE` | Swap back buffer to display (the "present" operation) |
| `SET_AUTO_UPDATE` | Enable/disable automatic buffer swaps |
| `CLEAR` | Clear a specific turtle's drawings |
| `CLEAR_SCREEN` | Reset entire canvas |

### State Synchronization Strategy

A critical design decision: **Python owns the authoritative state; TypeScript owns the rendered representation.**

When you call `t.forward(100)`:

> 1. Python calculates the new position using its local [(x, y)](file:///Users/aaqidmasoodi/Documents/codescapes/src/runners/python/turtle_shim.py#1330-1331) and [heading](file:///Users/aaqidmasoodi/Documents/codescapes/src/runners/python/turtle_shim.py#1167-1169)

Reviewer: Here too.

**Control Flow:** mainloop, done, bye, exitonclick

**Input:** textinput, numinput

**Multiple Turtles:** Turtle() class, clone()

**Screen Singleton:** Screen(), getscreen()

**Alias Classes:** `RawTurtle`, `RawPen`, `Pen`

---

## Performance Characteristics

### Message Throughput

For tracer(0) scenarios, we can sustain thousands of commands per second. The limiting factor is typically JavaScript execution time for rendering, not message passing.

### Memory Usage

The draw history consumes memory proportional to total primitives rendered. For typical educational uses (thousands of lines), this is negligible. Long-running generative art might accumulate significant history; clear() releases per-turtle history.

### Rendering Performance

Canvas 2D operations are GPU-accelerated in modern browsers. The three-layer compositing in `swapBuffers()` uses `drawImage()` which is highly optimized.

---

## Packaging and Distribution

We're currently preparing two standalone packages:

### pyodide-turtle (PyPI)

A Python package installable via micropip:

```
await micropip.install('pyodide-turtle')
import pyodide_turtle as turtle
```

> Drop-in replacement for the standard turtle module in any Pyodide environment.

Reviewer: 👍

### @codescapes/turtle-canvas (npm)

A React component for the rendering side. Developers building their own Pyodide applications can integrate turtle graphics without reimplementing the renderer.

---

## Try Turtle Graphics in Browser

**CodeScapes**: [codescapes.io](https://codescapes.io)  
Create a Python project and start drawing immediately.

---

## Acknowledgments

This project builds on [Pyodide](https://pyodide.org)'s extraordinary work bringing CPython to WebAssembly. Without Pyodide providing a real Python runtime in the browser, bridging to turtle would be impossible.

Thanks to the Pyodide community for the invitation to contribute this post.

---

*Aaqid Masoodi*  
*Creator, CodeScapes* 
*Masters In Computing* Dublin City University  

> *January 2026*

Reviewer: Feel free to introduce yourself at the very beginning of the post. Since it is a quite  long post, introducing yourself (and codespaces too if you want) would be useful to advertise yourself and your project.
